title: ai4lam Metadata/Discovery WG Monthly Meeting

# October 12, 2021

9 AM California \| 12 PM Washington DC \| 5 PM UK \| 6 PM Oslo & Paris


**Attending**

-   Jeremy Nelson (Stanford)
-   Erik Radio (Colorado)
-   Tim Thompson (Yale)
-   Victor Mireles (SWC)
-   David Lowe (Texas A&M)

**Regrets**

-   *Name*

**Notetaker (alpha by first name): **

[]{#anchor}Helpful Links

-   [*Metadata WG Zotero Group
    Library*](https://www.zotero.org/groups/2709151/ai4lam_metadata_wg/library)

[]{#anchor-1}Project Documents and Data

-   [*WG
    charter*](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1ypcx2F30siqr-KYOKFZtVv8h9PIS9a77/view?usp=sharing)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   [*WG Google Drive
    folder*](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1cpZtbjKadgD30794fD97XY-EChUSy2r9?usp=sharing)

[]{#anchor-2}Agenda Topics

1.  Updates, announcements, intros

2.  Demo of Jupyter Book for Metadata WG
    [*https://ai4lam.github.io/metadata-working-group/*](https://ai4lam.github.io/metadata-working-group/)

3.  Community Survey on AI projects with metadata

    a.  [*Survey
        > Draft*](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1aMGRqeF-6BrGW7qvRat8V86nCVO-a4SxLbLexJMMx08/edit)

[]{#anchor-3}Meeting Notes

1.  Introductions, Erik Radio is a new co-chair for the Metadata WG

2.  Jeremy: We now have a Github pages website based on Jupyter Book
    live at

    a.  [*https://ai4lam.github.io/metadata-working-group/*](https://ai4lam.github.io/metadata-working-group/)

    b.  Please suggest any changes/comments, will add new sections for
        > Tutorials and projects

    c.  Send Jeremy your github username to be added to the repository

3.  Erik: Initial survey for the community

    a.  [*https://pro.europeana.eu/project/ai-in-relation-to-glams*](https://pro.europeana.eu/project/ai-in-relation-to-glams)

    b.  https://docs.google.com/document/d/1aMGRqeF-6BrGW7qvRat8V86nCVO-a4SxLbLexJMMx08/edit

    c.  Open to any questions to add

    d.  Add institutional support, organizational structures, buy-in
        > from administers

    e.  Make a case for AI projects

    f.  Third party services that you have investigated

    g.  Erik will work on survey for November meeting; identify
        > listservs at that meeting and send out

    h.  Possible write up of results as article

4.  David: will talk about his recent article related to machine
    learning at our November meeting.
