ai4lam Metadata/Discovery WG	 Monthly Meeting

May 12, 2026

8 AM California | 11 AM Washington DC | 4 PM UK | 5 PM Oslo & Paris

**Attending**

* Name, institution  
* Erik Radio, University of Colorado  
* David Lowe, LSU  
* Jeremy Nelson, Stanford  
  


## Helpful Links

* [Metadata WG Zotero Group Library](https://www.zotero.org/groups/2709151/ai4lam_metadata_wg/library)

## Project Documents and Data

* [WG charter](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1ypcx2F30siqr-KYOKFZtVv8h9PIS9a77/view?usp=sharing)  
* [WG Google Drive folder](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1cpZtbjKadgD30794fD97XY-EChUSy2r9?usp=sharing)

## Agenda

* Announcements  
  * Review of ai4lam WG Form  
  * FOLIO AI/ML SIG meeting  
    * Scheduling a time period  
    * Subgroup polls (developer focus, policies, and education)  
  * ai4lam Academia Education pillar  
* David Lowe  
  * ACRL “AI Competencies for Catalogers and Metadata Specialists”  
    [https://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/ai\#ethical](https://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/ai#ethical)  
  * Divided into two sets  
    * Mindsets \- curiosity and healthy skepticism, using judgement, responsibility to community, collaborating with   
    * Competencies 4 categories  
      * Ethical Consideration \- impacts on community  
      * Knowledge and Understanding \-technology  
      * Analysis and Evaluation \- assessing   
      * Use and Application \- contextually aligning w/community values  
    * Based on ACRL information literacy framework  
  * Challenge: For each competency, think of 

  * #### Ethical Consideration:

    * #### Facilitate and advocate for more equitable access to AI technologies and AI literacy.

      * AI use of voice-to-text and video-to-text to generate transcripts for use by with visual disabilities

    * #### Promote fairness in the use of data and design of AI system

      * Related to voice-to-text

    * #### Protect individual autonomy and privacy rights, cultural diversity, and intellectual property rights when using AI systems.

      * Proper attribution of sources  
      * Good record-tracking  
      * AI Agent guardrails to respect and not use PII from library systems through the use of APIs  
      * IP guardrails

    * #### Ensure appropriate accountability for the design and use of AI systems, including transparency, explainability, accuracy, and reliability.

      * Chat bot in the wild, nightmare to think about making these meet all of these parameters

    * #### Consider the broader impacts of AI on communities, workers, and the environment.

      * Cognitive load in a teaching situation, any way to mitigate that danger creators of teaching materials

  * ### Knowledge & Understanding

    * #### Develop a basic understanding of AI technologies.

    * #### Understand AI attribution and detection

      * Carry Weaver with Canadian Libraries Group, how to attribute AI content.   
      * Citation guides, properly cite including your prompt\!   
      * Detection of AI usage, false positives, cases in front of review board, AI plagiarism

    * #### Stay current with AI applications by following reliable sources from a diverse range of experts.

    * #### Critically evaluate sources of information about AI for accuracy and bias

      * Appropriate levels of information to users

    * #### Understand AI-related policies and regulations relevant to your context.

      * Stanford restricts use of certain models for sensitive data and library use in Stanford code repositories

  * ### Analysis & Evaluation

    * #### Explain AI technologies and their impacts on library services and resources.

    * #### Evaluate benefits and risks in the deployment of AI technologies.

    * #### Critically analyze AI technologies using a multifaceted approach.

    * #### Evaluate AI tools in the context of specific library tasks and services.

  * ### Use & Application

    * #### Apply AI for task efficiency and quality enhancement.

    * #### Use AI to facilitate communication and collaboration in the workplace.

    * #### Develop effective prompting strategies for optimal AI output.

      * JSTOR example, extract persons from Civil War article

    * #### Explore the capabilities of AI for innovation

      * Blue Core, FOLIO work

    * #### Select AI tools that are designed for accessibility and usability.

  * Policies by different institutions  
    * Stanford \- Central IT   
    * University of Colorado \- policies being set by CU system  
    * LSU \- senior administration, let teaching, worried by learning and cognitive burden by students. If you just use Google translate, actively conjugating verbs, compare to what is going Bloom’s taxonomy different levels of learning. Syllabus for 101 not use translating tool at all, at higher level classes use different aspects of AI tools. Depends on   
      